We live in a wireless world! All the technologies and standards that have been
released in the past five years, along with the ones that will be released between now and
2020, means that almost everything we do—every aspect of our lives—has a wireless component.
In fact, wireless data communication is omnipresent today—in the cordless phones
we use in our homes and offices, in the over 6 billion cellular phones that roam the world,
even in warehouses, where wireless is used to keep track of inventory. Today, we can purchase
nearly all types of products or board a flight with our cellular phones and tablets,
thanks to wireless. Furthermore, homes, businesses, and even whole towns are now
equipped with wireless networks that allow residents, employees, and visitors to access the
Internet from anywhere using laptop computers, mobile phones, and tablets.
Whether you are a manager who needs a better understanding of the impact of wireless
communication devices, an IT professional looking to enhance your understanding of the
field by learning more about wireless data communications, or a student taking an introductory
course in this topic, Guide to Wireless Communications, Fourth Edition, will help you
in that journey and prepare you for more in-depth learning.
Approach
Since the introduction, in mid-1995, of infrared data interfaces in laptop computers, which
allowed two computers to communicate without wires, along with the publication, in 1997,
of the first IEEE 802.11 wireless local area network standards, the field of wireless data communications has continued to expand at a dramatic pace. This book provides the reader
with an in-depth introduction to wireless data communication technologies that are based on
standards, along with others that are important components of today’s wireless world. The
text covers the basics of radio frequency transmissions, transmitters, receivers, antennas,
IEEE 802.15.1 and Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4 and ZigBee standards for low-rate wireless personal
area networks, IEEE 802.11a/b/g/n/ac/ad and the upcoming /ax and /ay standards for
wireless local area networking (Wi-Fi), IEEE 802.16 (WiMAX) and Free Space Optics (infrared)
wireless metropolitan area networks, the evolution of cellular technology all the way to
5G and satellite wireless wide area networks, and, finally, radio frequency identification
(RFID) and near field communication (NFC). Many aspects of coexistence (the ability of
two or more of these technologies to work in the same physical space) are also discussed, as
are the basics of implementation and security issues for each of the mentioned technologies,
along with a comprehensive tour of the various business and residential applications of wireless
technologies in Chapter 12.
Using straightforward language, this text introduces the most important technical aspects of each
technology and can be used in classroom settings in technical colleges, early year university
courses, or for distance education. It features extensive linking to websites where the reader can
find additional materials. Please note, however, that although the URLs for some of these sites
were accurate at the time this book was printed, these web resources can change frequently.
This text’s pedagogical materials include Real-World Exercises, which further your learning
outside the classroom setting, and Hands-On Projects, which take you through the often
step-by-step process of performing tasks relevant to working in wireless communications. The
Hands-On Projects, which can be performed in the lab or at home, use inexpensive,
consumer-class equipment as well as freeware and demo versions of popular software. Finally,
there are Challenge Case Projects, team-based research projects that help expand the students’
knowledge of the technologies discussed and direct them to additional learning resources.
Guide to Wireless Communications, Fourth Edition, is designed to meet the needs of students
and professionals who want to gain a better understanding of the fundamental concepts, scope,
and issues surrounding the implementation of wireless data communications technologies. The
text assumes a basic knowledge of computers and networks at CompTIA A+ and Network+
levels. The pedagogical features provide a realistic, interactive learning experience to help prepare
students for the challenges of working in the field of wireless data communications.
Chapter 1, Introduction to Wireless Communications, provides an overview of a range of
applications of wireless data communications in personal, local, metropolitan, and wide
area networks. This chapter also looks at some of the advantages and challenges of wireless
data communications.
Chapter 2, Wireless Data Transmission, introduces you to wireless data transmission
techniques by discussing various techniques used with infrared light and radio waves to
transmit data without wires.
xiv Introduction
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. WCN 02-200-203
Chapter 3, Radio Frequency Communications, looks at the individual component blocks
used in the design of radio systems and how they are used to transmit data. It also provides
an overview of standards and their role in the wireless data communications industry,
which is important knowledge for anyone working in the industry.
Chapter 4, How AntennasWork, takes a simplified but in-depth look at antennas and the
important role they have in the successful implementation of a wireless data communications
system.
Chapter 5, Wireless Personal Area Networks, looks at the first two technologies
developed for short-range wireless data communications, Bluetooth and ZigBee (IEEE
802.15.4).
Chapter 6, Introduction to Wi-Fi WLANs, provides essential knowledge of the basics of
Wi-Fi LANs by taking an in-depth look at the early design and implementation of IEEE
802.11, Wi-Fi, and prepares the reader to learn about the more complex enhancements
to the standard covered in later chapters.
Chapter 7, Enhancing WLAN Performance, details all of the IEEE 802.11 amendments
that have helped make WLAN performance competitive with wired LANs, from
802.11a/g to 802.11ac and introduces 802.11ax and ay.
Chapter 8, Expanding WLANs and WLAN Security, covers implementation enhancements
that have been created to expand WLANs and make them easier to manage. It
also introduces core WLAN security concepts.
Chapter 9, Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks, is an introduction to Free Space
Optics, microwave, and WiMAX, wireless technologies that can interconnect LANs, provide
last-mile connectivity, and also make it possible to deploy data networks in remote
areas, across and in between cities and even covering entire continents.
Chapter 10, Wireless Wide Area Networks, takes a look at the evolution, design, and the
basics of implementation of cellular networks, as well as satellite technologies and how
these are used to extend the reach of wireless data communications networks across the
entire world.
Chapter 11, Radio Frequency Identification and Near Field Communication, describes
the RFID technology that is being used today to help identify, count, and track everything
from small packaged products to the entire contents of large warehouses automatically
and without wires. It then introduces NFC, the technology that enables wireless payments
such as Apple Pay, enables tap-to-pay using credit and debit cards, and can simplify the
establishment of connections between devices like cellular phones, tablets, wireless speakers,
cameras, and other devices.
Chapter 12, Wireless Communications Everywhere, takes learners on a comprehensive
tour of how wireless data communication technologies are being used today and introduces
some potential future applications.
Appendix A, Completing Hands-On Projects Using Windows 10, outlines some of the
differences between the text’s Hands-On Projects in Microsoft Windows 7 and completing
them using Windows 10 to guide users who might be using the latest version of the
operating system.